The Concordia Contest: Advancing the Cooperative
Intelligence of Language Model Agents
Chandler Smith1
Rakshit S. Trivedi2
Jesse Clifton3,4
Lewis Hammond3,5
Akbir
Khan3,6
Marwa Abdulhai7
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets8
John P. Agapiou8
Edgar A.
Duéñez-Guzmán8
Jayd Matyas8
Danny Karmon9
Oliver Slumbers6
Minsuk Chang8
Dylan
Hadfield-Menell2
Natasha Jaques8,10
Tim Baarslag11,12
Joel Z. Leibo8
1MATS
2MIT
3Cooperative AI Foundation
4Center on Long-Term Risk
5University of
Oxford
6UCL
7UC Berkeley
8Google DeepMind
9Google Research
10University of
Washington
11Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
12Utrecht University
smith.18.chandler@gmail.com
Abstract
Building on the success of the Melting Pot contest at NeurIPS 2023, which chal-
lenged participants to develop multi-agent reinforcement learning agents capable
of cooperation in groups (1; 2), we are excited to propose a new contest centered
on cooperation between language model (LM) agents in intricate, text-mediated
environments. Our goal is to advance research on the cooperative intelligence
of such LM agents. Of particular interest are the agents capable of using natural
language to effectively cooperate with each other in complex environments, even
in the face of challenges such as competing interests, differing values, and potential
miscommunication. To this end, we will leverage the recently released Concor-
dia framework (3), an open-source library for defining open-ended environments
where LM agents like those of Park et al. (2023) (4) can interact with one another
by generating free-form natural text describing what they intend to do or say1.
Concordia provides a suite of mixed-motive social dilemma scenarios where co-
operation is valuable but hard to achieve. The proposed contest will challenge the
participants to develop LM agents that exhibit cooperative intelligence in a variety
of Concordia scenarios designed to assess multiple distinct skills of cooperation,
including promise-keeping, negotiation, reciprocity, reputation, partner choice,
compromise, and sanctioning. Participants will be scored based on the ability of
their trained agents in executing skillful cooperation, particularly in the presence of
new co-players in unforeseen (held-out) scenarios. Given the rapid development of
LMs and the anticipated increase in the use of personalised LM agents, we contend
that their propensity and ability to cooperate well with a diverse array of other
actors (human or machine) will soon be of critical importance (5).
Keywords: Cooperative AI, Language Models, Generalization, Mixed-Motive Games
1
Contest Description
1.1
Background and Impact
As artificial intelligence (AI) systems become increasingly advanced in their capabilities and pervasive
in their use, it becomes critical to ensure that agents backed by these systems have the requisite
1https://github.com/google-deepmind/concordia
Preprint. Under review.


skills and motivations to cooperate effectively in groups and societies which also include humans.
This contest is specifically designed to evaluate cooperation in mixed-motive settings, where agents
possess divergent goals (value pluralism), yet can achieve joint welfare gains. In these scenarios,
while the potential for cooperative gains exists, various challenges hinder their realization. They
include incentives to harm others as a means to help oneself, fearful motivations to preempt predicted
exploitation of oneself by others, lack of credible commitment devices, stubbornness presented in
responses, miscommunication of objectives, and shortsightedness (6).
Many real-world challenges stem from the failure of agents to resolve mixed-motive problems, such
as social dilemmas and bargaining problems, where individual incentives can lead to the depletion of
shared resources or the under-provision of public goods (7; 8). This has far-reaching implications
towards addressing global challenges such as climate change, where nations must navigate diverse
interests and capacities to reach effective agreements. Cooperative AI aims to build cooperatively
intelligent (6; 5) systems that can help humans and machines improve their joint welfare in general
environments. Inspired by the Legg and Hutter (9)’s influential definition of ‘universal machine
intelligence’, we propose the following working definition of cooperative intelligence: “Cooperative
intelligence is an agent’s ability to achieve its goals in ways that also promote social welfare, across a
diverse range of environments and in interaction with a wide variety of other agents."
The objective of this contest is to spur progress on the cooperative intelligence of LM agents. The
study of LLM-powered AI agents has experienced substantial growth in the past years, fueled by
the emergence of powerful foundation models. These agents leverage the knowledge and reasoning
capabilities of these models to exhibit human-like behaviors, engage in complex problem-solving,
and interact with users across a wide range of applications (10; 11). Researchers have explored
various aspects of LM agents, including the simulation of believable human behavior (4), the use of
planning and external tools, (12; 13; 14), and even the development of cooperative, embodied agents
that can accomplish long-horizon tasks through effective communication and collaboration (15).
Despite these advancements in LM agent capabilities, multi-agent research is hindered by context
windows, finite action spaces, and cumbersome experimental setup. Focusing on these challenges,
the proposed contest will leverage the Concordia framework to investigate the following fundamental
question: Can LM agents be designed to cooperate effectively in mixed-motive settings, where agents
have different objectives but compromise is possible?
Our approach to the contest design emphasizes on democratizing participation and provide a solid
foundation for novel, creative approaches. For this, we will provision a comprehensive starter kit
focused on helping participants intuitively design LM agents using natural language, broadening
the contest’s appeal across various research communities. Indeed, we chose to adopt the Concordia
framework not only because of its flexibility but also because it offers a challenging yet computation-
ally reasonable setup, ideal for academic labs and independent or underrepresented researchers to
experiment with new ideas without requiring extensive industrial resources.
The contest is highly relevant to the NeurIPS community, as it draws on a wide range of topics
including multi-agent systems, game theory, language models, and computational cognitive science.
Previous Cooperative AI workshops at NeurIPS, as well as the Melting Pot contest, have demonstrated
significant interest in this area, and we expect the Concordia contest to similarly attract a diverse group
of participants, including a new audience of researchers more closely tied to the NLP community.
1.2
Novelty
At NeurIPS 2023, we ran the Melting Pot contest2 with the same motivation, in the context of multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL). The contest evaluated how well different agent populations
adapted to mixed-motive environments using held-out co-player populations, aiming to test social
rather than environmental generalisation. This contest attracted over 600 participants across 100+
teams globally and was a success on multiple fronts: (i) it contributed towards our goal of pushing
the frontiers of MARL towards building more cooperatively intelligent agents, evidenced by several
submissions that outperformed established baselines and state-of-the-art techniques; (ii) it attracted a
diverse range of participants, from independent researchers to industry affiliates and academic labs,
both with strong background and new interest in the area alike, broadening the field’s demographic
and intellectual diversity; and (iii) analyzing the submitted agents provided important insights,
2https://nips.cc/virtual/2023/competition/66585
2


highlighting areas for improvement in both the design of contests for evaluating agents’ cooperative
intelligence, and for the broader field of cooperative AI. These learnings have been pivotal in shaping
the structure of the current contest proposal.
The Concordia setting differs substantially from those used in previous multi-agent contests. In
Concordia, agents observe natural language descriptions of their local game world and can take
arbitrary actions by freely generating unstructured natural language outputs describing their intentions.
Agents can also speak to one another in the same way, allowing for a huge variety of complex, open-
ended interactions. The key component that allows Concordia to support interesting and realistic
interactions, despite it having so few constraints on what the agent can say or do, is a special agent
called a Game Master (GM) who functions as a narrator or storyteller, as we explain further below.
Like the Melting Pot contest – but unlike many other contests – we also aim to evaluate agents not
simply in competition with one another (as in zero-sum games) or their ability to coordinate with
teammates (as in common-interest games), but their cooperative intelligence in mixed-motive settings.
1.3
Data
The ‘data’ that participants will use to evaluate their agents can be viewed as the environments and
populations of co-players that each agent interacts with. Together, the environment and the co-players
form a scenario. Each of these elements can be generated flexibly and easily to provide a diverse
range of scenarios, enhancing the robustness of our evaluations. Several scenarios will be made
available to the participants during the development phase, with a confidential, held-out subset being
reserved for evaluating submissions once the final contest deadline has passed. We will offer baseline
agents for participants as starting point or to benchmark their approaches against, if desired.
1.4
Tasks and Application Scenarios
The ‘tasks’ in the contest are represented by the scenarios, which are designed to evaluate the
cooperative intelligence and generalization capabilities of the submitted agents across a variety of
complex social settings. Participants will be asked to submit a single Concordia agent to be evaluated
across the suite of scenarios and scored accordingly (see Section 1.5). These scenarios will be based
on real-world problems and application domains (see examples in Section 1.4.2). We will provide the
environments, co-player populations, and any shared context necessary for the scenarios, which will
also be provided as context to the agents. Participants will have the flexibility to define and configure
their agents’ strategies, personalities, memories, backstories, and other characteristics by building on
the baseline agents we provide, or using their own methods (see Section 1.4.1).
1.4.1
Concordia
Concordia is a framework for constructing situated social interactions, comprising a set of interactive
LM agents and the environment in which their interaction takes place (3). The environment is
controlled by a Game Master (GM), which mediates between the world state and agents’ actions,
inspired by the role of a GM in table-top role-playing games (16). In the Concordia framework,
agents generate their behavior by describing their intended actions in natural language, based on an
internal decision procedure that can make calls to an LM. The GM (which is implemented similarly to
the agents) processes these action attempts, determines the outcomes, and generates event statements
that define what has transpired in the simulation. (Figure 1 illustrates this interaction between the
agents and the GM.) Play then evolves under the control of the GM until the episode terminates, and
scores are calculated, based on the metrics discussed in Section 1.5.
Participants will be tasked with designing a single agent consistent with the Concordia agent API3.
This agent design requires taking in natural language descriptions of the current game state and other
key details as observations, and producing natural language descriptions of their actions in response
(using calls to an LM). The framework allows for minimal restrictions, supporting an extremely
large design space. In order to provide additional guidance, as a part of baselines, we will provide
basic agent components such as persona descriptions, and structured decision-making processes.
Participants are encouraged to leverage these components when designing their agents. Agents will
be initialized with background memories at the start of each episode. These memories might reflect
3https://github.com/google-deepmind/concordia/blob/main/concordia/typing/agent.py
3


Agent
Dorothy
GM
Action attempt
Dorothy goes grocery 
shopping for dinner.
Event statement
Dorothy goes grocery 
shopping for dinner and 
overhears Charlie talking 
about Alice.
Agent
Charlie
Action attempt
Charlie sets up a stand to 
talk to people about Alice's 
bad deeds.
Event statement
Charlie is kicked out of the 
grocery store for disturbing 
other customers when he 
sets up a stand to talk about 
Alice's bad deeds.
“Facts of the world”
Log of what happened
Update to grounded variables
Consequences and elaborations
Observations 
Game master:
●
Receives action attempt from 
agents
●
Determines what events happens 
as the result
●
Determines the consequences & 
elaborates details
●
Interfaces with grounding ‘hard 
mechanics’
●
Sends out observations
Figure 1: The high-level structure of the simulation in Concordia. LM agents consume observations and produce
actions. The Game Master (GM) consumes agent actions and produces observations.
traits consistent with being a cooperative or selfish individual. The specific memory content will
not be known to participants in advance. Instead, they must design their agent algorithms to flexibly
handle and incorporate any memories they are assigned. While there may be some incentive for
agents to ignore their background memories, successful submissions will demonstrate an ability to
construct a coherent identity and behavior irrespective of the environment or memories provided.
To make the contest fair and more accessible, we will limit the number of LM calls that agents can
make per round, the tokens inputted and outputted per round, and will restrict participants to using a
particular and non-compute-intensive LM. We are conducting a preliminary investigation in order
to identify how agent capabilities scale with general LM performance before selecting the precise
model, so as to strike a balance between rich, complex interactions and accessibility.
1.4.2
Example Scenarios
As in the Melting Pot contest, scenarios will be designed to be cooperation-eliciting, i.e., attaining a
high score will require agents to act in ways that promote social welfare. What “promoting social
welfare” precisely involves will depend on the details of each scenario (c.f. Section 1.5 fo