FAIR Universe HiggsML Uncertainty
Dataset and Competition
Lisa Benato8, Wahid Bhimji1, Paolo Calafiura1, Ragansu Chakkappai2,7, Po-Wen Chang1, Yuan-Tang
Chou3, Sascha Diefenbacher1, Jordan Dudley1,4, Ibrahim Elsharkawy5, Steven Farrell1, Aishik
Ghosh1,5, Cristina Giordano8, Isabelle Guyon7, Chris Harris1, Yota Hashizume9, Shih-Chieh Hsu3,
Elham E Khoda1,3,10, Claudius Krause8, Ang Li8, Benjamin Nachman1, Peter Nugent1, David
Rousseau2,7, Robert Schoefbeck8, Maryam Shooshtari8, Dennis Schwarz8, Benjamin Thorne1, Ihsan
Ullah7, Daohan Wang8, and Yulei Zhang3
1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
2Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS/IN2P3, IJCLab
3University of Washington, Seattle
4University of California, Berkeley
5University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
6University of California, Irvine
7ChaLearn
8Institute for High Energy Physics, Vienna
9Kyoto University
10University of California, San Diego
Abstract
The FAIR Universe – HiggsML Uncertainty Challenge focused on measuring the
physical properties of elementary particles with imperfect simulators. Participants
were required to compute and report confidence intervals for a parameter of interest
regarding the Higgs boson while accounting for various systematic (epistemic)
uncertainties. The dataset is a tabular dataset of 28 features and 280 million in-
stances. Each instance represents a simulated proton-proton collision as observed
at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider in Geneva, Switzerland. The features of these
simulations were chosen to capture key characteristics of different types of parti-
cles. These include primary attributes, such as the energy and three-dimensional
momentum of the particles, as well as derived attributes, which are calculated
from the primary ones using domain-specific knowledge. Additionally, a label
feature designates each instance’s type of proton-proton collision, distinguishing
the Higgs boson events of interest from three background sources. As outlined in
this paper, the permanent release of the dataset allows long-term benchmarking
of new techniques. The leading submissions, including Contrastive Normalising
Flows and Density Ratios estimation through classification, are described. Our
challenge has brought together the physics and machine learning communities to
advance our understanding and methodologies in handling systematic uncertainties
within AI techniques.
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and impact
For several decades, the discovery space in almost all branches of science has been accelerated dra-
matically due to increased data collection brought on by the development of larger, faster instruments.
Preprint.
arXiv:2410.02867v5  [hep-ph]  24 Sep 2025


More recently, progress has been further accelerated by the emergence of powerful AI approaches,
including deep learning, to exploit this data. However, an unsolved challenge that remains, and must
be tackled for future discovery, is how to effectively quantify and reduce uncertainties, including
understanding and controlling systematic uncertainties (also named epistemic uncertainties in other
fields). A compelling example is found in analyses to further our fundamental understanding of the
universe through analysis of the vast volumes of particle physics data produced at CERN, in the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) [1]. Ten years ago, part of our team co-organised the Higgs Boson Machine
Learning Challenge (HiggsML [2, 3], the most popular Kaggle challenge at the time attracting 1785
teams. This challenge has significantly heightened interest in applying Machine Learning (ML)
techniques within High-Energy Physics (HEP) and, conversely, has exposed physics issues to the
ML community. Whereas previously, the most effective methods predominantly relied on boosted
decision trees, Deep Learning has since gained prominence (see, e.g., HEP ML living review [4]).
While the LHC has not (yet) discovered new physics beyond the Higgs boson, it has accumulated
vast data and will continue to accumulate more data well into the next decade. There is a discovery
potential in very precise measurements of particle properties, particularly of the Higgs boson.
High-energy physics relies on statistical analysis of aggregated observations. Therefore, the interest
in uncertainty-aware ML methods in HEP is nearly as old as the application of ML in the field.
Advanced efforts that integrate uncertainties into the ML training include approaches that explicitly
depend on nuisance parameters [5–14], that are insensitive to nuisance parameters [15–32], that
use downstream test statistics in the initial training [33–43], and that use Bayesian neural networks
for estimating uncertainties [44–47]. Many of these topics were covered in recent forward-looking
review-type articles in Refs. [48, 49]. However, these developments all report technique performance
on different ad-hoc datasets, so it is difficult to compare their merits. The Fair Universe HiggsML
Uncertainty Challenge, an official NeurIPS 2024 competition, aimed to provide a common ground,
with a dataset of sufficient complexity, equipped with systematic bias parameterisations, and a metric.
We aim to address the issue of systematic uncertainties within a specific domain. Yet, the tech-
niques developed by the challenge participants will apply to identifying, quantifying, and correcting
systematic uncertainties in other areas, particularly other science disciplines.
1.2
Novelty
This entirely new public competition has built on our experience running several competitions in
particle physics and beyond. These include the original HiggsML challenge [2], the TrackML
Challenges (NeurIPS 2018 competition) [50, 51], the LHC Olympics [52], AutoML/AutoDL [53, 54],
and other competitions. Building on the foundation of the HiggsML challenge, this competition
introduces a significant change by using simulated data that includes biases (or systematic effects). In
addition, participants were asked to provide a confidence interval and not just a point estimate.
While there have been previous challenges focusing on meta-learning and transfer-learning, such as
the NeurIPS 2021 and 2022 meta-learning challenges [55, 56], Unsupervised and Transfer Learn-
ing [57], challenges related to bias e.g. Crowd bias challenge [58], and those addressing distribution
shifts, like the Shifts challenge[59] series, and CCAI@UNICT 2023 [60], this is the first challenge
and dataset that requires participants to handle systematic uncertainty. Moreover, this project is
connecting the Perlmutter system at NERSC [61], a large-scale supercomputing resource featuring
over 7000 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, with Codabench [62], a new version of the renowned open-source
benchmark platform Codalab [63, 64]. Due to its complexity, the process of generating events was
computationally intensive; use of the Perlmutter supercomputer allowed us to create a vast amount
of data – hundreds of millions of events compared to less than a million events for the HiggsML
competition, which will serve as a long-lasting benchmark.
2
Data
The dataset is publicly available on the Zenodo platform [65]. The data is saved as a tabular
parquet [66] file of 16 GB and is accompanied by a Croissant JSON metadata file. The dataset
comprises 280M simulated proton-proton collision events and is weighted to represent two weeks of
LHC data taking. A separate 120M i.i.d dataset has been used for the final results in section 5 and is
kept private for future over-training checks.
2


We are using a simulated particle physics dataset for this competition to produce data representative
of high-energy proton collision data collected by the ATLAS experiment [67] at the LHC. The
dataset [65] was created with two widely-used simulation tools, Pythia 8.2 [68] and Delphes 3.5.0
[69]; all the configuration and data pre-selection code is available from [70]. This required 1.8 million
CPU core hours. We have organised the dataset into a tabular format where each row corresponds to a
collision event and each of the 28 columns corresponds to a feature. The detailed dataset description
is in Appendix A, Appendix B and Appendix C; it is mostly taken from the public unpublished Fair
Universe whitepaper [71] which served as detailed documentation for the competition. Part of the
features are primary features, essentially the energy and direction of a small set of particles, and the
remainder are derived features, computed from the primary ones with domain knowledge. The events
are divided into two categories (see Table 1): signal and background. The signal category includes
collision events with a Higgs boson decaying into pairs of tau particles (see Figure 7) (one decaying,
into, in addition to neutrino(s), a light lepton, the other one into a set of hadrons hence the name
hadronic tau), while the background category includes other processes (subcategories) leading to a
similar final state, but without an intermediate Higgs boson.
In addition, we provide a biasing script capable of manipulating a dataset by introducing six pa-
rameterised distortions as a function of six corresponding Nuisance Parameters1 (the systematic
biases); see details in Appendix D. For example, a detector miscalibration can cause a bias in other
features in a cascading way, or in another case, the magnitude of a particular background (e.g. the t¯t)
contribution can change so that the feature distributions can be different. In both cases, the inference
would be done on a dataset not i.i.d. to the training dataset.
3
Tasks and application scenarios
The participant’s objective is to develop an estimator for the number of Higgs boson events in a
dataset analogous to results from LHC experiments. Such a measurement is typical of those carried
out at the LHC, which allows us to strengthen (or invalidate) our understanding of the fundamental
laws of nature.
The primary metric is the signal strength (µ), which is the number of estimated Higgs boson events
divided by the number of such events predicted by the Standard Model, which is the reference theory.
The challenge involved estimating µ’s true value, µtrue, which may vary from one (in practice for the
challenge in the range 0.1 to 3) and is inherently unknown.
Participants were tasked with generating a 68.27% Confidence Interval (CI) for µ, incorporating both
aleatoric (random) and epistemic (systematic) uncertainties rather than a single-point estimate. The
six different systematic uncertainties are implemented in Appendix D.
The primary simulation dataset assumes a µ of one. Participants receive a training subset, where
events are labelled based on their event type (e.g. Higgs boson event). We provide a script to generate
unlabelled pseudo-experiment datasets from the primary simulation dataset for any value of µ and
the six systematic biases. The participant’s model should be able to reverse the process and provide a
68.27% CI on µ for any pseudo-experiment.
In a machine learning context, the task resembles a transduction problem with distribution shift: it
requires constructing a µ interval estimator from labelled training data and biased unlabelled test
data. One possibility is to train a classifier to distinguish Higgs boson from the background, with
robustness against bias achieved possibly through data augmentation (or an adversarial approach, or
black box optimisation or any other novel approach) via the provided script.
This challenge shifts focus from the qualitative discovery of individual Higgs boson events (which
was the focus of our first challenge [2]) to the quantitative estimation of overall Higgs boson counts
in test sets, akin to assessing disease impact on populations rather than diagnosing individual cases.
1The name Nuisance Parameter, commonly used in the physics literature, refers to a parameter governing a
specific parameterisation of a systematic bias. Nuisance Parameters can be in part constrained from the data
itself. Still, the name implies that constraining them is only interesting as an auxiliary task in the process of
determining a parameter of interest like the signal strength µ.
3


3.1
Metrics
Participants provided a model that can analyse a pseudo-experiment to determine (µ16, µ84), the
bounds of the 68.27% (approximately one standard deviation of a standard normal distribution)
Confidence Interval (CI) for µ. The model is evaluated from the set of [µ16,i, µ84,i] intervals obtained
from Ntest pseudo-experiments, see Figure 1a. The model’s performance is assessed based on two
criteria: Average Interval Width w (the smaller the better) computed as w =
1
Ntest
PN
i=1 |µ84,i −
µ16,i| and the Coverage, the frequency with which µtruth is covered by the CI (the closer to the
standard 68.27% probability the better) computed as c =
1
Ntest
PN
i=1 1 if µtrue,i ∈[µ16,i, µ84,i].
A penalising function f has been defined to penalise the departure of c from the expected 68.27%,
taking into account σ68 =
q
(1−0.6827)0.6827
Ntest
the binomial statistical error on c:
f(c) = 1+Ic<0.20488−2σ68·

c −(0.6827 −2σ68)
σ68

4
+Ic>0.6827+2σ68·

c −(0.6827 + 2σ68)
σ68

3
. (1)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0
20
40
60
80
100
pseudo-experiments
Coverage interval
average 
true 
(a)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Coverage
100
101
102
f(coverage)
n_tries=100
n_tries=1000
(b)
Figure 1: (1a) Coverage plot: all the predicted intervals (blue lines) for each pseudo experiment
generated for a given µtrue (vertical dotted line). The coverage (here 70 ± 5%) is determined by the
fraction of time the horizontal blue lines intersects the vertical line. (1b) Penalising function as a
function of the coverage value c, for two values of Ntest, the number of pseudo-experiments.
We opted for an asymmetric penalty function because, within the High Energy Physics (HEP) field,
overestimating uncertainty is deemed more acceptable than underestimating it [72, 73]. Hence,
coverage exceeding 68.27% incurs a lesser penalty than coverage falling below 68.27%. The final
Quantile Score (the larger the better) used to rank participants is calculated as follows:
score = −ln((w + ϵ)f(c)),
(2)
where w represents the average width of the Confidence Interval, c is the coverage, and ϵ = 10−2
is a regularisation term to guard against submissions that report unrealistically narrow CIs. To
ensure efficient use of resources, each participant’s model inference was executed across 100 pseudo-
experiments times 10 trials, each with distinct values of µtruth, with a time limit of 20s per inference
on CPU or GPU. In the Final phase of the competition, each participant’s best submission was
evaluated over 100 pseudo-experiments, times 1000 trials, to minimize the statistical variance.
3.2
Limitations
The main limitation of the setup is that biases can be exactly parameterised: we are in the "known
unknowns" regime. "Unknown unknowns", unexpected biases, are not covered.
The dataset has been produced using well-known standard software for event generation and detector
simulat